[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: We've all
heard the adage, the only
constant in life is change.
And most of us are surprised or
frustrated when change happens.
In this ever-shifting economic
and technological landscape,
it's become crucial to
learn the skills needed
to adapt when change
happens, whether it's
a sudden job loss, or
an unexpected accident,
or a difficult breakup.
Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, and joining
me is career success coach
and bestselling author Tama
Kieves, who knows firsthand
the fear and paralysis that
accompanies drastic life
changes.
Tama talks about her
journey in her latest book,
"Thriving Through Uncertainty--
Moving Beyond Fear
of the Unknown
and Making Change Work."
Thank you for joining me.
>>TAMA KIEVES: [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Wow, what a story.
My goodness.
So first of all,
you went to Harvard
and you graduated with honors?
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
From Harvard Law School.
And I'm a perfect example
of resisting change.
Like you said in the beginning
of-- just resisting change,
or--
we always want to be safe.
We always want to be secure.
We always want to
do the right thing.
And when I was younger, I
knew that I wanted to write.
That was my dream.
But I grew up in
Brooklyn, New York,
to an orthodox Jewish
family, and writing was not
a safe path.
And so--
>>LISA: Write?
What does that mean, anyway?
You want to write?
>>KIEVES: I want to--
exact-- that's
basically what I got.
You're going to write?
You're going to starve,
you're going to write.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] Right,
because what does that mean?
>>KIEVES: Yes.
They just-- it didn't
sound like a career path.
It sounded like a hobby.
And I ignored that desire,
like so many people,
and I did what is
"safe" or practical.
And I went off to
law school instead,
and to Harvard Law School,
and graduated with honors.
And I was on partnership
track in a major law firm.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KIEVES: And like so many
people, I was just miserable.
I was empty.
>>LISA: But I have to ask you,
how did your parents feel?
I mean--
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: --here you are as
proud parents of a graduated--
>>KIEVES: Very proud parents.
>>LISA: And the
money that it takes--
oh, and we have some photos
here of you graduating.
I'm a parent.
I would've been proud of you.
>>KIEVES: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: What happened?
>>KIEVES: My mother was
bragging in every synagogue,
for all she was worth.
My little girl.
I don't want to tell you.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Sure.
>>KIEVES: They were horrified,
because I at one point
just walked out of everything.
I just walked out of everything.
Which by the way, you
will do, or you may
do, if you're unhappy enough.
>>LISA: If you are fed up.
>>KIEVES: I was just so
unhappy, and I was dying.
And thank god somebody said
something amazing to me.
He said, think about it.
If you've been this
successful doing
something you don't love--
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
That's a great--
>>KIEVES: What could you
do with what you love?
Right?
>>LISA: Great point.
I always wonder,
though, when people
want to make a drastic change.
You never have everything
happen all at once.
It's this thing and then the
next thing, and it surmounts.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: And you want to escape.
You want to just leave it all.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Some people do that.
They just cold turkey
and leave it all.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Or you stay.
There's no easy way to do it.
>>KIEVES: And I am so
glad you brought that up,
because I don't think there's
a right way or a wrong way
to do it.
The problem is, everybody is
looking for the perfect answer.
Or you read self-help books
and they're like, well,
she did this extreme thing, so
I should do the extreme thing.
>>LISA: Right
>>KIEVES: And when I'm
working with clients,
everybody has their own
chemistry, their own way,
and for those of--
I did a drastic change because
I couldn't do it any other way.
I was dying.
I had to get out.
If you can do it another
way-- if you can do something
on the side or
experiment, why not?
>>LISA: So you got
a job at a law firm.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: And you're
working at the law firm.
Did you get to write there?
Did you get to express
yourself at all?
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS] That's
a-- you sound like my mother.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Oh.
Sorry.
>>KIEVES: I'm teasing you.
Because she was
like, you're writing.
You're writing briefs.
And it's like-- but it's
almost like saying to Picasso,
who's painting garages
or something-- well,
you're painting!
You know?
And so--
>>LISA: OK.
>>KIEVES: Being a lawyer was
such a different modality,
and it was such a different--
it was linear thought.
And there's nothing
wrong with it.
It was just that I had this
creative impulse in me--
this desire to be
something else.
And if you're doing work that
really isn't what you love,
it can take more of your energy.
It can exhaust you.
>>LISA: So do you
use your lawyer
energy or that analytical
energy in what you do now?
>>KIEVES: In some ways, yes.
I always tell my clients,
I'm like your advocate.
I'm no longer a lawyer,
but I'm your advocate.
I'm going to prove
the case of you.
your potential.
>>LISA: Ah.
That's great.
>>KIEVES: And I
think the other way
I use it is it gives me
credibility, because I
am about following an inspired
path-- the path of genius,
listening to an inner
voice, and being visionary.
And it just gives it
credibility that I have made it
in the, quote, "real world."
And I have found a different
kind of power to use.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
>>LISA: And for anyone
who is in that place,
that is in that dead
end, non-creative space,
they want to make a change,
what would you suggest?
Rather than-- well, would you
shock your family in saying
I'm leaving you.
>>KIEVES: Just
shock your family.
It's fun.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
That's a great--
I did it.
You can too.
>>KIEVES: You can too.
Send them to therapy
for a change.
No.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: You do it.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
I think the main
thing that I would say
is just start experimenting--
that you don't have to make
any huge change right away.
Of that again, everybody has
their path and their way.
I believe a path is
already inside you.
And so I would just
want you to experiment.
Because some people think, oh,
I want to be a photographer,
or I want to be a this,
or I want to be a that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: How about you
experimenting a little bit
before you go jump off a cliff?
>>LISA: Join a club.
Do something as a hobby first.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
Take a class.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: You know?
You can do something
on a Wednesday night.
You don't have to quit your job.
>>LISA: But for those who
want to take that leap
and take that risk,
is there an easy way?
I guess easy is
not the right word.
Is there another way to do
it that's gentler on yourself
and your loved ones?
>>KIEVES: I wish there was.
Certainly if you're
conscious enough
where you can have that
great communication, sure.
But to make a change like that,
at least for me, I was dying.
I was out of my mind in pain.
I was in depression of, I
didn't want to make this change.
I didn't consciously
want to make this change.
I put a lot of investment
into doing this.
And that path seemed secure,
and that path seemed reasonable,
and it was kind of fun.
You say you're a Harvard
lawyer, everybody respects you.
You say you're a
poet, not so much.
[LAUGHS] You know?
And so--
>>LISA: True.
Yes.
>>KIEVES: I did
not-- every fiber
of my being on some
level, or my mind,
did not want to
make that change.
But my soul, my gut,
my heart, my genius,
something else beyond me did.
And so at the time, it
is a little cataclysmic.
There is a grieving process.
Like one life or one
identity is leaving.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: And again,
everybody does it differently.
Some people might
find an amalgam of it.
find a different way.
>>LISA: Did you
hang up the suits?
Did you donate them?
>>KIEVES: I burned
the pantyhose.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: You did?
>>KIEVES: I did.
>>LISA: You had a ceremony.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's
interesting, though.
Because you let go
what wasn't working.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
And I will say-- and just
to be clear, when I left,
I was not clear that that's it.
I'm leaving forever.
This is it.
It was a next step.
It was oh, my god,
I am dying here.
And I was literally in therapy,
and I literally at one point
was considering at some
point ending my life.
I was so depressed.
And I was talking
to the therapist
about not wanting to live.
And he said, well, you
could leave your job.
You don't have to
leave the planet.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And that had
not occurred to me.
That had not occurred to me.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KIEVES: I was so in
that culture of success.
And this is the hoop
you jump through.
You do this.
You get an A. You get a bonus.
You perform.
You do what
everybody else wants.
It never even occurred to
me that it was a valid path
to do what I wanted.
>>LISA: A, support
groups are amazing.
Therapy, friends, people you
can have around you even when
there are so many that say--
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: That's a
really key point.
That's one of the main
reasons I do the work I do.
That's why I wrote my books is,
I want my books and my words
to be the something
that somebody can put
in their pocket that
guides them so they never
have to do it alone.
>>LISA: That's the support--
>>KIEVES: And there are so many
resources now, thank god, and--
>>LISA: Yes.
And then on the other
side, if you were a parent
and you see this culture of kids
who are taking Adderall to keep
up, and the learning
curve goes up,
and the stress, and
these standardized tests,
what would you tell them?
There is no "follow your
dream" category in college.
>>KIEVES: And I think that's
a really hard thing, that I
think for parents, it's undoing
our usual way of thinking.
We learned, be a doctor.
Be a lawyer.
Be a professional.
Be a this.
Make money.
Make money is the
source of success.
And I want to educate people
that happiness and health
and doing your right life
is your greatest success.
And so as a parent,
maybe it is, you're
giving your kid permission
to find their genius--
their talent.
And that might mean
experimenting a little bit.
>>LISA: Well, let's talk
about the money, though.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: So?
>>KIEVES: Let's talk
about the money.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Did it follow you?
What did you do?
You were making a--
probably a great living.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
Yes.
>>LISA: What did you
do about running--
>>KIEVES: The money
is a terrifying piece.
Of course it is, especially
when we live in this culture.
But one of the things I
always tell my clients,
and one of the things
that I learned personally,
was as much as you think you
want money, you want security.
You want to know that
you're going to be OK.
>>LISA: True.
>>KIEVES: That's
really what you want.
And what I learned the hard way
is that health is your greatest
security.
Health is your greate--
I was making a great
living and I was dying.
And I have a lot of clients
who make a lot of money,
and they've got health risks.
And at that point, all the money
in the world won't save you.
>>LISA: True.
>>KIEVES: And so for me,
the greatest security,
first and foremost, is doing
what you came here to do.
And to your point about--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: OK, OK, but how
do you pay the mortgage?
Or how do you pay
for the apartment?
It's not an either/or.
It's not like you
have to do one thing.
That again, you
might do many thi--
you might do different
things on the side.
There's a beautiful
term in the literature--
it's my favorite
term, and it's called
"multiple streams of income."
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: All the love.
>>LISA: Well, this is what
we're heading towards.
You've got the Gen X, Y,
Z, and every generation
is now either
getting a side hustle
or some type of entrepreneurial
spirit is happening.
>>KIEVES: And it needs to.
Our culture is changing so much.
What used to be the
track of security
is no longer a competitive edge.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: Companies want
to see that you're adept--
abdapta-- I can't
even say the word.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: Adaptable.
[LAUGHS] You know?
>>LISA: Yes.
Yeah.
>>KIEVES: They want to see that
you can do different things.
Everything's changing.
It's no longer one track.
And so what we
used to maybe think
was erratic or not
focused, I think
now is multi-talented
or multi-passionate.
And you're going to use
different strengths.
>>LISA: Well, look.
You are a great example.
You wanted to be a writer.
>>KIEVES: Right.
>>LISA: But you probably
make your money as a coach.
>>KIEVES: Exac-- you know--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: And when
I started writing,
I realized I wanted to
be around other writers,
and so I started
a support group.
And people said,
oh my god, you're
good at speaking or teaching.
And so I started teaching.
And then when I started
teaching, people said,
would you ever lead retreats?
And so I started
leading retreats.
And people started asking me
to work individually with them.
And so-- before coaching
was even a living.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>KIEVES: And so I make my
money in li-- going back
to that multiple income streams.
I make my money as a coach.
I make my money as a speaker.
I make my money as an author.
I make my money doing retreats.
Some months, I'm not making
as much money speaking,
but I'm making more
money coaching.
Some months, coaching is
down, but writing is up.
>>LISA: So one thing
leads to the next,
as long as you just
take the first step.
And this also applies to someone
who is maybe being laid off,
or it's not their
choice to go and find--
you've got that mourning
period of losing your job
and dealing with that, and
having to pick yourself up
again.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: So is it
one step at a time?
Is that how you're done this?
>>KIEVES: That's the
only way that I know it.
In "Thriving Through
Uncertainty,"
I have a whole chapter on
following the breadcrumbs.
Just following the breadcrumbs.
Everybody's looking
for the master
plan and their whole life.
They're trying to figure
out their whole life.
OK, if I'm this age
and I have this, that,
and I have this whatever.
And what I'm going
to ask you to do
is follow what's
speaking to you now.
What do you love now?
What's moving you now?
But to your point of
when you get laid off--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: Right?
>>KIEVES: Everybody
immediately thinks OK, I've
got to jump into that next job.
But there is that moment of
grieving or sadness or fear.
And I think everybody wants
to know, what do I do?
What do I do?
I think it's a path of
undoing and undoing.
And what I mean by that
is undoing the fears,
undoing all the horrible
stories you're telling yourself.
Because what happens is when
you're in fear and anxiety,
you can't hear inspiration.
You can't be listening to
inspiration and guidance
and fear and anxiety
at the same time.
>>LISA: Well, it is the common
default mechanism of change.
Fear is.
>>KIEVES: Sure is.
>>LISA: It really is.
And we get fed so much fear
from various media sources
that it really is
all about the fear.
It keeps you on the
edge of the seat,
and the fear and the fear.
And talking about thriving
through uncertainty.
Let's just talk about how
much uncertainty there
is right now in the world.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: We've got
financial uncertainty.
We've got environmental
uncertainty.
We've got relationship
uncertainty,
religious uncertainty.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: So you're talking about
thriving through all this?
>>KIEVES: Thriving
through uncertainty.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Yeah.
But what's--
>>KIEVES: First of all, I always
write what I need to learn.
So full disclosure.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: I write what
the heck I need to learn.
And I think the world is
in rock and roll times.
I really do.
I think we're in a
wildly different time.
There's so much going on.
And so in "Thriving
Through Uncertainty,"
I talk about how uncertainty
is actually your superpower.
And what I mean by that--
why say it's your
superpower, is when
all the answers in the world
aren't doing it for you
anymore, there's no solidity.
There's no one expert.
There's no stability.
Maybe for the first
time, we're going
to start listening to
ourselves and to our instincts
and to our genius.
Because I know-- as a coach, I
know that the path is already
inside you.
You already have an answer.
There is a stability
in each of us.
It's not external.
>>LISA: That's so
interesting, because after you
have this level of uncertainty,
you feel like playing small.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Being very contracted.
>>LISA: And I was having
this conversation with myself
this week of, how
am I going to handle
all the things I need to handle
from this tiny little box?
It's just not going to work.
I have got to expand
myself in order
to have the capacity to
handle the things that
are coming at me.
Otherwise, everything
else is going
to be feeling like a threat.
I love your reframe of
uncertainty as a superpower.
>>KIEVES: It's a superpower.
>>LISA: That's a great reframe.
>>KIEVES: It really is.
Because again, we all cringe.
We all immediately
contract, because we're
trying to stay in control.
And a creative,
inspired life, a life
of being more than you
ever dreamed you could be,
is not going to
come from control.
>>LISA: Right?
>>KIEVES: It's--
>>LISA: Or contraction or
playing small, or hiding.
>>KIEVES: Or contraction
or playing small.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>KIEVES: And by the
way, sometimes we're
playing small in a way
that society thinks is big.
And what I mean by that--
I like your look.
[LAUGHS] What I mean by that is
that when I was practicing law,
everybody thought, oh,
she's in that big time.
She's playing big.
That was actually
playing small for me,
because it wasn't my real dream.
It wasn't my real self.
I was playing it safe.
I was doing what everybody
else thought was OK,
so that was playing small.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KIEVES: Playing
big meant I'm going
to trust my instincts more than
what all the experts tell me.
>>LISA: Now when you decided
to do that, did you fail?
>>KIEVES: Every day.
I'm still failing.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Right?
Failing forward.
>>KIEVES: Depending on
what you-- failing forward.
Depending on what
you call failure.
And I think failure was
the biggest fear I had,
of all of them.
Not even money-- failure
was my biggest fear,
because it was a--
I was groomed for success,
and I had this swanky job.
And I was so afraid that I'm
going to go off to find myself,
and everybody's going to go, she
should have kept her day job.
Of just-- I was so
afraid of failure.
But there was this one fantasy
that kept coming to me of,
I kept--
I had this fantasy that
at the end of my own life,
there would be all these
beings in white robes.
And they would
show me everything
my life was meant to be.
They would show me the final
movie explaining your life.
And they would show
me here was the books
you were going to write.
Here were the people
you were going to help.
Here was the editors lining up.
Here was the agent.
Here was the publisher.
You weren't meant
to practice law.
On Sunday nights, when you
were throwing up miserable,
we thought you knew.
But no, you had willpower.
You kept going.
And I had that fantasy.
And I thought, oh my god.
I can't get to
the end of my life
and realize I could
have been a writer.
I could have been an author.
I could have lived my dreams.
And I was the only
one stopping myself.
And so I always tell
people that as much
as you may fear failure, I
think you fear regret more.
>>LISA: Oh.
That is a great point.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
>>LISA: That is a great
point, and you definitely--
that is a great vision too,
because if you didn't see
that--
>>KIEVES: Yes.
It was just that thing of,
I can't face my own life
knowing I didn't even try it.
It's one thing if you try
it and it doesn't work
and the world stops
you a million times.
But to stop ourselves.
I couldn't bear that.
>>LISA: So did you dive
into teaching or learning
before you became a teacher?
Did you go through courses?
Or did you start to study?
>>KIEVES: I am the course.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: There is
that adage of "you
teach what you need to learn."
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And so I always
shared what I was learning.
I've always shared what
I was going through.
I've always-- my books--
all my books are
very, very honest,
and they're very brazen in
that way of just sharing,
oh my god, here is
when I was a mess.
And when this
wasn't working out.
It's not your typical self-help.
Like, "and here's the three
steps I told my clients."
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: Because I
believe that people
learn through authenticity
and through the truth, right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: And so I just--
I always shared
what I was learning,
and I always shared what
was working for me, and so--
and I never, ever
planned on this career.
I never planned on that at all.
I never thought, gee, I'm
going to be a teacher.
Or gee, I'm going
to be a seminar
leader across the country.
I'm going to be an
expert-- a national expert.
I had no plans of that.
I was just trying
to save my life.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>KIEVES: That's
all I was doing.
>>LISA: And so you dove into
what you thought was best.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Now, did you
take writing classes?
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Did you take
personal development classes?
What did you take?
>>KIEVES: That is
what saved my life.
So I just experimented a lot.
And that's what I always ask
other people to do is, don't--
everybody wants to immediately
think, OK, that's it.
I'm going to do x.
And that's it.
I'm going to-- and I want
people to experiment,
and taste things, and see.
Because even as a writer,
I didn't know what kind
of writing I wanted to do.
Like at first, I thought
I wanted to write poetry.
And I was so depressed
by that answer.
I was like, oh my god.
You've got to be kidding.
Please give me another answer.
I don't know if
you ever do that,
where you're asking your
inner guidance for an answer.
And it's like, you get
something and it's like,
oh, please give me another one.
>>LISA: Was poetry interesting?
>>KIEVES: Something
that's lucrative.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Oh, come on.
There's some great poetry.
>>KIEVES: There are
great poets, right?
>>LISA: True. yes.
>>KIEVES: I thought, oh, my god.
I don't even buy those books.
Oh, my god.
But I always--
>>LISA: I think there's like
this slam poetry contests
and so there's--
>>KIEVES: Sure.
>>LISA: There's a way.
But I always tell
people, you don't
get to choose what you love.
You don't get to
choose what you love.
It chooses you.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: You don't get to
choose your wildest dreams.
It chooses you.
You don't get to choose what
lights you up-- what moves you.
And if you ignore
it and you fight it,
or you try to water
it down, saying,
well, I'll make it practical.
I'll do this.
I'll do that.
You will-- I always say, if
you compromise your desire,
you're going to
compromise your strength.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: But I do think,
though, we get to choose.
And it may be we-- it
feels the same way.
Maybe it chooses us and us
choosing with the same energy.
>>KIEVES: I think I
hear what you're saying.
We get to choose whether
or not we'll listen.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: I get to
choose whether or not
I'll listen in this lifetime.
>>LISA: Sometimes
it's a good yes.
>>KIEVES: I don't get
to choose what I hear.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: I don't get
to choose what it is.
And very often, your
calling, your dream,
your next wave of change
might be something
you don't want to hear.
I wanted a lucrative answer.
I wanted to say,
oh, don't do law.
Be a surgeon.
[LAUGHS] I wanted
something that--
that was not my--
>>LISA: You were going to
go through all that again.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: I don't think so.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
>>LISA: Well, let's take
a look here at a video
that Tama was talking
about when she really goes
a little bit too
far into the future
and made some decisions
that wouldn't have maybe
necessarily served her.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- A lot of us, by the way,
have been successful in life
because we've known how
to undercut ourselves.
We've known that--
we've been successful
because we know how
to clip our wings,
or be what we think
other people want.
And then the path
of authenticity,
the path of really going for
our passion, the path of really
going out there, is--
it's that fear of, my
god, we may lose approval.
But here's the thing.
You may lose other
people, but it's worth it,
because I don't want
you to lose yourself.
Because you lose yourself, you
lose everyone and everything.
I remember years ago,
I was really scared
of what my father would
say when I left law.
I always joke about my mother,
but I was really scared
about my father, because
he was really volatile.
And I thought he
would excommunicate me
from the family.
I really did, because he was--
he could be like that.
He was really a volatile guy.
And I was terrified,
and I remember
telling a therapist at the time,
I don't want to lose his love.
I'm scared.
I don't want to do this.
I don't want to lose my father.
I don't want to lose his love.
And she just said, if
you could lose somebody
by being who you are, then
you don't have their love.
[APPLAUSE]
If you could lose somebody
by being who you are,
then you don't have their love.
And then years
later, I discovered
"A Course in Miracles,"
which I teach and I love.
And "A Course of Miracles" says,
nothing real can be threatened.
Nothing real can be threatened.
By the way, I did
tell my father.
I was so scared.
I prepared.
I went to god knows how
many therapy sessions.
God knows, right?
I told my father and
he just went, eh.
OK.
[LAUGHTER]
I'm like, I spent
thousands of dollars--
[HYPERVENTILATING]
I was like, what?
I have killed so many trees
on this issue journaling.
And he was just like, yeah.
You're smart.
You'll figure it out, I know.
[LAUGHTER]
What?
What, you got something to eat?
It was like-- so anyway.
[LAUGHS] It's just amazing, so--
but by the way, I never
felt so loved in my life.
I never felt so
loved in my life,
because he didn't
excommunicate me.
And that was probably his way
of saying, I love you madly.
Right?
Like, meh.
Eh.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: That wasn't the
reaction you expected.
How did you feel?
>>KIEVES: I just felt so loved.
I just was amazed, because--
and I think that's
the amazing thing,
is that when you make these
life changes in your own life,
you get to really see
your real relationships.
If you're being
the real you, you
get to meet the real
self of other people.
And I think you get even
more intimacy with people,
and/or you find out
who aren't your people.
>>LISA: Well, these stories,
though, also we tell ourselves,
that we think and we project
and we future pace ourselves
and thinking all this stuff is
going to happen, and it hasn't.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: And I--
>>KIEVES: And I have a really
great story about that,
of it's just--
I always tell my
clients that you
can't plan an inspired life.
Everybody's in their head.
They're trying to
plan everything.
They're trying to figure it out.
How do I get to
A to B to C to D?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: And my
greatest story about how
I got my book
published was again,
like you said, about
following that next step
and that next step.
>>LISA: The breadcrumbs.
>>KIEVES: With the breadcrumbs.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: And so when
I finally finished
writing my first
book-- it took me 12
years to write my first book.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS] And--
>>LISA: Good to
know, for authors.
>>KIEVES: I know.
I always tell people,
it took me 11 years
to heal, and 11 years
to believe in myself,
and 11 years to learn this,
and one year to write a book.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>KIEVES: So-- but
anyways, I didn't
know how to get it published.
I didn't know.
What do you do?
How do you get it out
there in the world?
And so I read about self
publishing and commercial
publishing.
And I kept hearing
an inner voice.
And it just kept saying,
just put it in the river.
Just put it in the river.
Which makes no sense.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: It's--
[LAUGHS] it was like,
what kind of plan is that?
Please give me something linear.
But it was this guidance,
and I knew what it meant.
It meant, get it out
there some way, somehow.
Self-publish it if you have to.
Put your own money
into it if you have to.
Just get it into
the stream of life.
If it's supposed to
go somewhere, it will.
But you know how, like I
was saying before, you get
answers you don't want to hear?
It's like, oh, I don't
want that answer.
I want to-- but
anyways I ended up
having the guts to finally
self-publish my first book
after all of this.
And it started spreading
through word of mouth.
It hit "The Denver
Post" bestseller list.
It hit "The Business"
bestseller list.
And then four months
after I self-published,
I got an email from a woman
who worked for Random House.
She was in marketing and
publicity as a vice president.
And she was in a
career transition,
and she had somehow found
my self-published book
on the internet.
And she wrote, "Your fairy
godmother has arrived."
Your fairy godmother--
that's the email.
I got it.
And she wrote to
me and said it was
the best book she'd
ever read on finding
your calling and your dream.
And I want to get it published
by a New York publisher.
And so it was this amazing,
amazing thing about,
you can't plan that.
How can you plan that I'm
going to have a meltdown for 12
years writing this book?
Some other woman at
the end of 12 years
is going to have a
meltdown in her own career.
She's going to find it.
And that's how I'm going
to go to my next level.
But I deeply know that everybody
has something extraordinary
in them, and if they follow that
breadcrumb moment by moment,
they're going to get to
someplace they could never have
gotten in a conventional way.
>>LISA: You seem to
receive a lot of guidance.
Do you have a practice
through meditation, or--
what is your practice?
>>KIEVES: I receive
a lot of guidance,
because I have a lot of fear.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: So you're always active.
>>KIEVES: I have a
very active mind.
>>LISA: I would never have
been able to tell that.
>>KIEVES: No, I'm
sure you couldn't.
I'm sure I hide it really well.
It takes a team to
manage this brain.
Let's put it that way.
>>LISA: I can see that.
You have a lot of energy.
>>KIEVES: I have
a lot of energy.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: And if
this energy isn't
directed towards something
positive and useful,
it's not good.
And that's what I teach people.
You can use your
mind either way.
So to answer your
question about my--
>>LISA: Guidance.
>>KIEVES: --practice
and guidance,
I've taught "A
Course in Miracles"
for close to 30 years,
and so that's my path.
And I've never been
a great meditator.
I want to say, oh, yes, I am.
But I journal a lot.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>KIEVES: That's--
>>LISA: For people
that aren't familiar,
what is "A Course in Miracles"?
>>KIEVES: "A Course in Miracles"
is a spiritual psychotherapy
program that teaches you how to
live in love instead of fear.
And so it's a mind training
program that really--
and again, because I
have such an active mind,
it worked for me
of that, it really
directs the right
use of your mind.
That at any minute, you could
be having a fearful thought,
or you could be having
a loving thought.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>KIEVES: And so it's
a practice, like--
>>LISA: Of training towards
the loving thoughts?
>>KIEVES: Exactly.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
And with all of this stuff
that we're talking about,
like even when you said
about failure, it's like,
this is a practice
every single day.
People, I think again--
It's one of the
things I want people
to know in all of my work
is that people think I'm
going to beat that seven steps.
I'm going to hire that
perfect coach, and that's it.
I will never have to
deal with change again.
deal with my mind again.
Good luck.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: Good luck on that.
>>LISA: Well, you
write about something
called inspired self-dialogues.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: What are they?
So it's a technique that is in
"Thriving Through Uncertainty,"
and it's also on my website.
It's a technique I
use almost every day.
It's amazing for me.
It's a journaling technique,
and what it is is,
when your mind is crazy--
I could never shut it up
in meditation long enough
to get an answer.
>>LISA: The monkey mind.
>>KIEVES: Right.
Exactly.
And so in the inspired
self-dialogue,
I'll write for my fear.
I'll write when I'm crazy.
Like, I'm scared.
The check didn't come in.
I'm not going to make money.
Whatever the fear de jure is.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And so--
and then I write back
from this incredibly
loving voice.
The most loving presence
I could possibly
ever imagine-- the
voice of your spirit,
the voice of your genius.
Some people find it helpful to
think in terms of, what would
you say to your best
friend or to your child?
If your child or your best
friend was in pain or anxiety,
you would say something
loving and strong.
And so I write back
from that voice.
And then it's a conversation,
because sometimes my voice
will say, relax, dear one.
It's fine.
Blah, blah, blah--
whatever it's going to say.
And I'll be like,
I am not relaxed.
I'd better be a child of light.
They're going to
turn the lights off.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] Well,
doesn't that make you bipolar?
You're sitting here
saying I'm freaking out.
And you're like, relax.
>>KIEVES: Relax.
>>LISA: Be calm.
All the--
>>KIEVES: I love that.
>>LISA: Is that true?
>>KIEVES: So I love
that you said that.
What I think it is is that we
have both voices in our mind.
And what happens is that
the fear and anxiety blocks
your highest intelligence.
The fear and anxiety
blo-- even medical science
says that it restricts
your blood chemistry.
It just-- it restricts
your thought flow.
And so when you're scared
and you're amped up,
you don't have access
to your resourceful
mind-- your creative ideas.
And so we do have two
voices in our mind.
And what I'm always
trying to teach people--
>>LISA: True.
More than that.
>>KIEVES: Yeah, at least.
What I'm always
trying to teach people
is that you have a higher
intelligence and a love that
can guide you through
anything, if you listen to it.
But you are listening
to that fear.
You're indulging that fear.
>>LISA: So you're giving
in the opportunity
to hear another voice,
to have another opinion.
And I like the
idea that you give
the best advice you possibly
could to a best friend.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Or a child,
or a loved one.
>>KIEVES: Because you
speak differently to them
than you do to yourself.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: Why is that?
My best friend--
oh, you can do it.
You can do it, honey.
I believe in you.
Me, not so much.
>>LISA: Well, there's
also people, though,
in your life that will
have other voices as well,
talking about other voices.
Where you hear
them in your head--
the voice of your mother
and the voice of--
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Actually, we have a--
>>KIEVES: That's
what therapy if for.
No.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: The voice
of your therapist.
>>KIEVES:
>>LISA: Yes.
Everybody gives you advice.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: How do you know
what's the right advice?
>>KIEVES: Mm.
That's a great question.
I think-- so I have a chapter in
"Thriving Through Uncertainty"
that says, think twice
before you take advice.
Think twice before
you take advice.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>KIEVES: Because everybody's
coming at you with advice.
And especially if
you're shifting careers
or you're an
entrepreneur and you're
doing the life of
your dreams and
you get all this even business
advice and internet advice.
The main thing I would say is,
notice how it feels to you.
How do you feel when
you hear that advice?
If that advice makes you feel
peaceful or hopeful or excited,
I'd listen to it.
If not, I wouldn't.
And I think the main
thing I want you to do
is to start listening to your--
I want you to listen to people,
but then filter it through.
>>LISA: Well, take for example
something like Facebook.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: It changes all the time.
They're constantly
making it better, and--
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
It's very confuse--
and you're listening
to this idea and that.
Maybe you should post
this way and do that.
How do you really filter
through all the noise?
>>KIEVES: I think that is the
biggest thing we have to do.
I think that is the most
important thing we have to do.
>>LISA: Filter
through the noise?
>>KIEVES: Filter through
the noise, or stop
listening to external advice.
>>LISA: Mm.
>>KIEVES: Stop listening to
external advice, because we
think the experts know.
And I want you on an original
path that no one has--
no one knows your path.
You haven't been here before.
There's genius in you
that we don't know yet.
I spent so much time when I--
when my second book came out,
"Inspired and Unstoppable,"
worrying about, oh, Facebook.
And you should do this, and
you should do social media,
and I should do that.
I'm not doing this,
and I have to block.
But wait, I have to do this.
And I was making myself crazy,
instead of really following,
what do you want to do, Tam?
I'm a speaker.
I'm a writer.
That's where I belong.
I didn't belong doing
every single thing.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And you're trying to
do everything right, instead
of what's right for you.
>>LISA: And sometimes it
really does take focus,
and the people that really
do that on a marketing level
are brilliant at it.
That's their genius.
>>KIEVES: Right.
>>LISA: And let them do that.
Yes.
>>KIEVES: Yeah, that.
And also that again, there's
this belief system that there's
a right way to do it.
I got a book published
in a way that everybody
told me was crazy.
Everybody told me, you
can't just write a book.
You can't just write it.
>>LISA: Self-published.
>>KIEVES: You can't say,
oh, it's self-published
and think it's going to
go somewhere-- whatever.
And I kept following
that inner voice.
And sometimes your
inner voice is
going to tell you something
different or alternative that
is not what the experts say.
But again, I deeply
believe that we're here
to be new answers in the world.
We're not here to
fit into the world.
We're here to reshape the world.
We're here to make it
new with our answers,
and that's going to come
from listening to our genius.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Well, let's take a look here at
Tama talking about what she did
when things got really tough.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- I guess I wanted to start by
just asking a question to you.
Is it me, or has life
ratcheted up a notch?
Or two or three, yeah.
It's like, everyone
you know is going
through some kind
of uncertainty,
or some kind of difficulty.
or some kind of challenge.
Or maybe you're in
some kind of change.
And I think it's as though
the universe is saying,
the grace period is now over.
The grace period is now over.
We've been studying this stuff.
We know this stuff.
You know you have
an inner voice.
this love inside you.
Some of us know that there
is this power within us
that we can believe
in, that we can
tap at any single time in our--
at any time.
And it's time to do that.
Because I think for me, one
of the things I'm learning
is it's time to get out
of your head and be led.
It's time to get out of
your head and be led.
[APPLAUSE]
Right?
It's time to-- because
if you feel as though--
but you're scared, or you
don't know what's going on,
or what's supposed to
happen, or there's change,
here's what I want you to know,
and here's our theme for today.
That path is already inside you.
There is an answer
already inside you,
and it's moment by
moment that we listen.
But it's really about listening.
It's really about learning
how to trust that voice.
So what I want to
talk about is, what
stops us from
trusting that voice?
We know this.
We affirm these things.
We say these things.
We believe in them.
What stops us from truly
trusting and listening
to that voice?
So I don't know about
you, but one thing I know
is that if you're not listening
to the voice of your love
and your heart and your
commitment and your dream
and your power, then you are
listening to somebody else.
And you're listening
to something else.
Because again, I deeply
believe we are living
in wildly inspired times.
Are we not?
We are living in very, very
different, crazy times.
I believe they're
wildly inspired times,
and I believe it's
because we have wildly
inspired answers in us.
And it's time to live that dream
or that mission or that gift
that you have-- that thing
that someday you want to do.
That thing that you
always think about.
These are the times.
And so again, what
I was saying is,
if you're not
listening to yourself,
who are you listening to?
If you're not listening
to your heart,
you're not listening
to your light,
who are you listening to?
Are you listening to
the voice of the media?
the voice of education?
Are you listening to
the voice of a parent?
If you know my story, I
was listening to my mother.
That's who I was listening to.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Yeah.
When we do have all those
different pieces of advice,
and especially people we
care about that we listen to,
and we grew up
listening to, and--
>>KIEVES: They're in
our bloodstream, and--
the other thing I often
share with clients
also is, I never take
advice from unhappy people.
I never take advice from
unhappy people, or people
who aren't living their dreams.
If they're not really lit
up in living their dreams,
they may not know your path.
And some of the
people in our lives,
like our relatives or
whatever, they mean well.
They are speaking with love.
They want the best for you.
But they're speaking
with what they know.
And again, no one
knows your path.
You don't even know your path.
>>LISA: Well, so you're
talking about doing
a lot of self-guidance here.
And something that you talk
about in the book which
I like is, don't look
at what's falling apart.
Look at what's falling together.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: So most people look
at crisis as a dead end,
or there is no way out.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: And then we look three,
four months later saying,
oh, it was the best
thing that ever happened.
>>KIEVES: (LAUGHING) Exactly.
>>LISA: How do we
train ourselves,
in that moment of
crisis to say, this
is the best thing that
could ever happen?
>>KIEVES: I wish we could.
>>LISA: I know.
>>KIEVES: I do.
I have th-- I remember
talking to a friend one time.
Somebody broke my
heart-- broke up with me.
And I remember talking to one
of my girlfriends, going--
[SNIFFS] you just watch.
This is going to be
a freaking miracle.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: You did say that?
>>KIEVES: So I knew
that intellectually,
and that's the thing.
Most of us know these
things intellectually.
We've read the self-help
books, or we've seen--
we've watched "Oprah."
We know these things
intellectually.
This is about
integrating it now.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: This is about
really embodying it now.
So I would never
want to put pressure
on somebody who's in the
middle of something-- a crisis.
I don't want to put pressure
on them to feel great.
Feel positive.
Feel whatever.
I want to create safety for
them to feel whatever they're
feeling in that moment,
and to hold that awareness
that your brain is
telling you this
is the worst thing
that ever happened.
My life is over.
It's over.
And what I'd want you to know
is, one form of your life
may be over.
One expression might be over.
But it's so trite, but
it's like that caterpillar,
of the metamorphosis.
Of the caterpillar is
dying so that the butterfly
comes to life.
Right?
>>LISA: Well, yes.
And there's that, one door
closes and another one opens.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: There's a
lot of cliches here.
>>KIEVES: Yeah, we could
do all cliches now.
>>LISA: Right.
Yeah.
But the idea is, you said
the answer to how is yes.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Tell me what that means.
>>KIEVES: So that's
a saying that--
I think it's the author
Peter Block who said it.
I love it, because I
teach it all the time.
And it's basically
that everybody's always
trying to figure out,
but how do I do this?
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: How do I this?
How do I get there?
>>LISA: I say that all the time.
>>KIEVES: Yeah, we all do.
We all want to
figure out the path.
And again, I'm a
breadcrumb girl.
It's like the next step.
But the answer to how is yes.
And what that means
is, most of us
are trying to figure how to
get somewhere before we say yes
to what we really want.
If I can see how to
get there, then I'll
say yes to what I want.
And I really believe
that this is a path of,
you say yes first.
You have to--
>>LISA: And then how?
>>KIEVES: And then the how come.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
>>KIEVES: So the example I use,
actually, is if, god forbid,
a mother saw her child
pinned under a bus,
she's not standing
there going, I wonder
how I'm going to do this.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And will my
health insurance cover this,
and can I li--
she's not doing that.
She's like, I am going
to get my kid free.
That's all she knows.
She's saying yes,
and the how comes.
Supernatural strength comes.
>>LISA: Well, at the same
time-- so you say yes,
but then you do
need the roadmap.
You do need the how.
So after you have
an accident, you
say yes, I'm going
to heal from this.
Yes when you start recovering.
Now what am I going to do
about getting a new car?
How am I going to-- how am I
going to-- how am I going to--
>>KIEVES: Right.
And I think, to your point about
the roadmap, is that I don't--
again, I'm always talking
about an inspired life, not
a linear life.
So if you want a linear life
where you can plan it all out
and map it all out,
that's a valid life.
It's a smaller life,
because what you can see
and what you can imagine
is again, sometimes
denying yourself something.
And so for an inspired
life, it doesn't work
through planning it all out.
It's going to wor--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: Everybody's
looking for answers.
And what I always tell them--
don't look for answers
for your whole life.
That's just too much.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>KIEVES: What I want
you to look for is,
what's my next step?
What's my next step?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: What's my next step?
>>LISA: Because we
do tend to go so far.
>>KIEVES: Oh, god.
>>LISA: Well, if this
happens, then that.
Then this, then that.
Then this is going to wind
up, and then I'm dead.
>>KIEVES: I call that
playing mental chess.
That's what I do.
Now, if they do this, I do that.
I do this.
And we're planning with what we
know, or what we think we know.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: And life is
so much bigger and more
amazing than what we can know.
>>LISA: I get caught
with this all the time.
I try to predict the future--
>>KIEVES: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: --or what's
going to happen.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] And my husband
says this me all the time.
You're mind reading, you know?
[LAUGHS] And I'm like, I am?
Yeah, it's-- I go into that
default where I try to see it,
because I'm visual,
and if I don't see it,
I can't figure it out first.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: It goes out to--
this table.
There's only this table, because
I'm going to imagine it first.
And I need to imagine it first
in order for it to happen.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: But leaping right into
it happening isn't my lead.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: And so how would
you coach me if I say,
OK, well, I don't know
how to figure this out.
But I know what I want.
>>KIEVES: Right.
Right.
>>LISA: Would you
just say, imagine it?
>>KIEVES: So I think
the first thing is,
I want to get you feeling it.
I want to get you
in the desire of it.
>>LISA: What that
feels like, yeah.
>>KIEVES: Because again,
most people immediately
start off with, I want a
really successful business.
And then they
immediately go into,
oh, but my finances
are a mess, and I
don't know how to get a loan.
And I can't do this,
and I can't do that.
So they immediately start
focusing on the obstacles.
I want to get you
focused on the desire.
I'm going to have you tell
me more about what you want,
and more about what you
want, so that you're
in the feeling of it.
And from that feeling, we're
going to come up with, OK,
what would feel
good as a next step?
What would feel good as
a-- to approach this?
>>LISA: So go after
the why you want it
and the bigger purpose
connected to it.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
And the how fun it
would be, and how amaz--
what if it could work?
>>LISA: Fun.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
What if it could work?
Like I always have to remember,
because I still fall into this.
I'm preparing for a
seminar or something like--
and my mind's going--
I'll be flying.
I'll be flying there.
I'm like-- part of my
brain is going, well,
it's international,
so if you screw up,
you never have to
go there again.
[LAUGHS] So that's my inner
self-doubt going, if you really
mess this up, you never have
to go to that country again.
And so-- but I have to
change that self-talk to,
what if it was phenomenal?
What if it was great?
How would that feel?
How exciting would that be?
That more people are
now doing their dreams
and using their gifts
and being extraordinary.
What would that
feel-- so it helps
me get into that feeling of it.
And from that feeling, I
can accomplish anything.
And I will know a next step.
>>LISA: So you still have
negative self-talk too.
>>KIEVES: [SCOFFS] Yeah.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: A lot.
That's how you write
the books, right?
>>KIEVES: That's why
I'm a great teacher.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: Because again,
because of I think that again,
I think this--
if you are going to grow
for the rest of your life,
if you are going to
dinner or something new,
if you are going
to stay inspired,
you're always
going to your edge.
If you're going to
your edge, you're
always going to face fear.
I personally don't trust
experts that say, oh, I
don't have any fears ever.
It's like, well, then
you're not alive.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It is--
>>KIEVES: They're not alive.
It's part of life.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And it's not something that
we can reverse engineer
and say, OK, well, I'm just
never going to have fear again,
and really live in this place
of total, complete peace.
>>KIEVES: Right.
I think it's--
>>LISA: It's there for a reason.
>>KIEVES: It is
there for a reason.
And my fear has made me dig
deeper into my spirituality,
and make me dig deeper
into my real beliefs,
and what I will commit
to in this lifetime.
It doesn't let me be casual.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: It doesn't
let me coast.
And again, the one thing I
will say that I have from it,
though, is you start having a
track record of having trusted
your inner voice
and your instincts,
and that it did work.
And you didn't go bankrupt,
and you're not eating cat food.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: And no one you
love is eating cat food--
except your cats.
>>LISA: And then it eventually
works out, and have a track
record of it working out.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
So at least I have that
sanity now to say, OK, Tam,
you're scared out of your mind.
You're telling
yourself scary stories.
But you know these
principles work.
You know they work.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
And you have no idea
how it's going to work,
but it has worked in the past.
>>KIEVES: Always.
>>LISA: And that's why
you are where you are.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: And you've
just got to keep going.
>>KIEVES: And the reason that,
again, I don't map it out,
is because sometimes
we're going someplace
we never thought we'd go.
For instance, I speak
all over about listening
to an inner voice.
That is the last
thing on the planet
I would have ever thought I
was going to do with my life.
I grew up orthodox Jewish.
I went to Harvard Law School.
I made fun of people like that.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Really?
>>KIEVES: I made fun
of people like that.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>KIEVES: I used to have
it on my answering machine,
like "and trust your inner
journey" or something.
And my friends would be like,
what the hell happened to you?
You used to be normal.
And just-- so my
point is, sometimes
you can't map it out,
because you don't even
know where you're meant to go.
I've discovered different
capacities in myself,
and different belief systems,
and different abilities
than I knew I--
I didn't know I
was a speaker ever.
>>LISA: Ever.
>>KIEVES: Ever.
I knew I like--
I thought-- or
even with coaching,
I just thought I was needy.
I like talking to people.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>KIEVES: Who knew
it was a talent?
I'm relational.
>>LISA: I love it.
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS]
Let's take a look at
Tama we're talking
about the voices in our head and
the stories we tell ourselves.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- So I'll give you an
example of how stories work.
It's one of my good examples.
When I met my partner
many, many years ago--
Paul, who's back there--
and we met at a conference
many, many years ago.
And we were at this conference,
and we're walking together.
And when I'm relaxed,
I'm just chirping away.
I'm like, [CHIRPING AWAY]
yakking away.
And he's very quiet.
So he's very quiet.
And so my immediate
thought was like, ooh,
he's a good listener.
This is going to work.
So that's my first thought.
That's great, right?
Then I start-- you know how
you start hitting something,
and some fear starts coming in?
So all of a sudden, this
fear starts coming in of--
[GASPS] maybe I'm boring him.
Maybe I'm boring
him into a stupor.
[LAUGHTER]
So that's the second
thought that comes in.
And then all the crap from my
past, like past boyfriends,
and past relationships
start coming to my brain.
Like, you're so intense.
You're so intense.
So I'm having this
conversation in my head now.
Like, I am not that intense.
[LAUGHTER]
You know?
I am not.
And so I'm just having
this thing, and it's like--
and I'm thinking,
I'm not that intense.
And I'm thinking, I could
do better than this.
I really could.
While all Paul is
done has been quiet.
That is all that is going on.
The man has not said a word--
not said a word.
I'm immediately-- now I am
judging the hell out of him,
right?
Now I'm thinking, I
could do bet-- you know,
he's not even that good looking.
I could do better.
I'm going through this
whole thing in my head.
All that has happened in reality
is he hasn't said a word.
I have gone all over the place.
Thank god-- thank god in
that particular moment
I had the wisdom or presence
of mind to actually ask him
what was going on, instead of
having this war in my head.
And I had just said, well,
I noticed that you're quiet.
I noticed that you're quiet,
and I'm just wondering,
is something going on?
Whatever.
And he was really sweet.
And he said, well, to be
honest with you, I'm nervous.
You're a beautiful woman,
and you're intelligent,
and I'm a little nervous.
And I'm like, oh.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh!
What a superior individual.
[LAUGHTER]
This!
This could so work.
[LAUGHTER]
Isn't that a great
example of story?
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I love that
story of all the things
that you made up
about that meeting.
Everything's fine now.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
But I still make up
stories in my head.
We all do.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: We all do.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>KIEVES: And I think that what
I really want people to know
is that you are living,
every single day,
the stories you tell yourself.
>>LISA: My god, if my
steering wheel could talk,
it would be bad.
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: It would be bad.
But then, I need to talk it out.
I need to get it out
first, and then I'm calm.
>>KIEVES: Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Sometimes we
just need to hear it.
Speak it.
>>KIEVES: Or sometimes,
you don't even know that--
again, you think
the story you're
telling yourself is real.
You think that's reality,
and you don't realize
it's an unconscious story.
>>LISA: Very true.
So in your book, you talk about
being unfaithful to yourself--
being sporadic.
What do you mean by that?
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
I have a chapter of, dare
to be unfaithful, sporadic,
and unusually true to yourself.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>KIEVES: And it's
because I wanted
to give people permission
to experiment and explore.
I have a lot of
clients who are type A,
and they want to
force everything.
Like, that's it.
I'm going to meditate now, every
single day for an hour and 1/2.
Or I'm going to write
the Great American Novel.
And I want people to have
the breathing room to make
a commitment and break it.
To explore, to experiment,
because sometimes you're
making a commitment from your
head from what you think you
should do.
And I want to give you that
breathing room to choose again.
Choose again.
Sometime-- we start a
diet and we mess up,
and we think, forget it.
I'm never going to do that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And it's like, I want
this to be more self-loving.
I want it to be something that
you have permission always
to just start right now to
choose again, and to not worry
about being linear or staying
with the one commitment
you set, but maybe the higher
commitment, and the higher
goal, and to have
that experimentation.
>>LISA: I've heard the
phrase of making your life
unrecognizable.
>>KIEVES: Mm.
>>LISA: So that idea of being
unfaithful to what you thought
was so true, and changing it
so that It looks so radically
different, but in a good way.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
In a good way, you're
following again.
Because again, everybody
has their advice.
When I started writing, I joined
some writers' support group.
And I had some
curmudgeonly old man
that told me, if you
really want to be a writer,
you have to write
every single day.
And I panicked because I wasn't
writing every single day,
and I wasn't doing it right.
I've still never written
every single day.
And so I just--
I think that you have to
find your own chemistry
and your own rhythm.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: And you have to have
that experimentation to do it.
>>LISA: Yes.
So you talk about something
called a Win List.
What is a Win List?
>>KIEVES: So Win List
is a technique I use.
Again, it's in my
books, and it's also
on my website, tamakieves.com.
But it's a technique
I use with my clients.
And what it is is, many of us
who are in uncertainty of--
or maybe you're doing
your own business.
Your mind is racing and racing
about all you haven't done,
all you haven't accomplished,
how you're not making progress,
how you're not
getting there, how
you're cellulite is making
progress, but you're not.
[LAUGHS] And so--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: The Win
List is a technique
where I ask you to write maybe
five to 10 wins each day.
And what a win is is some
kind of progress-- some kind
of forward movement.
And some of it can be
external, like, OK, I
called that person I was
supposed to call today.
But what I'm even
more interested
in is internal
progress-- the things
you might normally
never recognize.
For instance, I'm
usually depressed
for 30 minutes when I wake up.
But today, I was
depressed for 29 minutes.
That's going to
go on a Win List.
And again, you might think--
most of us are so linear, we
think, oh, that's not progress.
But on this kind of
journey, it's all internal.
And it's the internal shifts.
And so I want to have
people credit themselves
for the things they are doing.
Like, I had the courage to
tell my husband the truth.
I backed down in the middle
of it, but at least I started.
So that goes on the Win List.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS]
>>KIEVES: I wrote
my damn Win List.
That goes on there.
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: I wrote on my Win List.
>>LISA: Or that you
went to do something
that you usually
have as a habit,
and you just stop
for a few minutes.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
Perfect.
>>LISA: Like eating chocolate
cake or something like that.
>>KIEVES: Perfect.
I was conscious.
I still caved, but I
was conscious this time.
>>LISA: So does it
help you actually
get rid of the bad habit?
>>KIEVES: Yes, it does.
Because what you're doing is
you're building the self-love,
and you're building
the sense of progress.
And bad habits come
from bad self-talk.
Bad habits come from,
I feel like a loser.
I feel like I'm never
getting anywhere.
Only chocolate cake is
going to save me now.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: But if I'm feeling
like, yeah, I am doing it.
Yeah, I am getting better.
Oh my god, I did
stand up for myself.
I did apply this.
And the other thing
about a Win List
is, sometimes what goes
on it is a moment when
you felt connected
to maybe the universe
or spirit or something.
Where all of a sudden you
had that thought and somebody
called to you.
So you feel like, oh,
maybe I'm not alone here.
Maybe there is a higher plan.
>>LISA: Where do you keep this?
Somewhere visible?
Or is it something that you--
>>KIEVES: That's a cool idea.
I just journal it on anything.
When I'm a nut,
anything will do.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Do you help
people with writing books?
Do you help them with talks?
What do you help them with?
>>KIEVES: Yes.
Anyth-- really, what
my dearest thing is,
I am here to help people
become the extraordinary selves
that they are.
And so I help artists and
entrepreneurs and visionaries
to really realize their highest
dream, whatever that is.
And so sometimes it is help--
I've helped a lot of people--
I do book coaching.
I--
>>LISA: Book coaching.
>>KIEVES: Yeah.
I've done business coaching.
I do whatever you
pay me for, really.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: OK.
Clean floors?
>>KIEVES: No, not whatever.
>>LISA: Do you do windows?
>>KIEVES: [LAUGHS]
>>LISA: What?
Can you tell me a little bit
of a success story of somebody
that you did work with, that
came from such a tiny place
into--
>>KIEVES: Just off
the top of my head,
I'm thinking about a client who
is also an author, who did not
think she could write, ever.
Who did not think
she could write.
And she was a very
gifted psychotherapist,
and she wanted to
have a book out there.
And she kept hiring all
these ghost writers.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: And one of
them actually died,
and I was teasing her like,
oh, they became a ghost.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Oh.
>>KIEVES: That's a
real ghost writer now.
But the point was, she
never believed she could
write or tell her own story.
And I kept bugging her.
Let's do this.
Let's get this out of you.
Let's you be you, right?
And she finally did,
and she did phenomenal.
Her books have done
better than mine.
It was just really
amazing to watch.
And so it was a great example
of, she was so shut down.
Like, there's no
way I could do this.
And I need experts, and I--
whatever.
>>LISA: Mm-hmm.
>>KIEVES: And again, I'm always
starting from the place of,
I never have an
answer for someone.
I don't know what the answer is.
I know how to find it.
>>LISA: You empower them to
find it within themselves.
>>KIEVES: Exactly.
Because I know there is a love
or an inspiration or something
that's speaking to that person,
and I'm following energy.
I'll follow-- I always follow
that inspired self in somebody.
>>LISA: And you just
light it up for them.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: Yeah, we
don't really have
people like that
in our lives that
are going to be a constant
coaching cheerleader.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
And for me, I am
a witness to that.
And I wrote all of my
books to be the same thing,
because not everybody can
afford coaching, right?
>>LISA: Right.
>>KIEVES: And so I
wanted all of my books
to be like this coach in
your pocket that-- and people
tell me that.
That it's on their bed
stand, or they read it
in the mornings,
of just something
that, I'm going to
remind you consistently
how amazing you are, and
how extraordinary you
are, and don't settle.
>>LISA: Do people
forget that that much?
>>KIEVES: Every day.
Every minute.
>>LISA: Mm.
Yeah.
>>KIEVES: I do.
I do.
I'm in this and I do,
because fear is so powerful,
and it takes over, and
we live in a culture
that we leave this
interview, and we're not
going to be hearing interviews
that are telling you
you're extraordinary.
>>LISA: No, we're not.
>>KIEVES: We're going
to be listening--
you'd better be careful.
And this and that,
and this and that.
>>LISA: What's wrong with you?
How come--
>>KIEVES: What's wrong with you.
How to fix you.
And so again, I think
we need these voices.
It's my life's work,
is that I really
want to be this voice in the
world that will consistently
remind you of how
unparalleled you are.
>>LISA: So you're
somebody's cheerleader.
You're really not going to
get that from your-- even
the people that love you
the most, because they--
as well-intentioned
as they may be,
they have a way of
saying it from--
>>KIEVES: Nagging.
[LAUGHS]
>>LISA: Good word.
>>KIEVES: Let's
just say what it is.
No.
>>LISA: Let's just
say what it is.
Yeah, exactly.
So you've explained
this a little bit.
But in the overall
picture of things,
what is your biggest why?
>>KIEVES: My biggest why?
That's interesting.
My biggest why, I think--
I always say that on my watch,
I don't want somebody giving up
on what they could have been.
I know my own life.
I know how unhappy and
how scared I've been,
and how many times I
have quit or almost
quit this path, and the
life I would have missed,
and the people I've touched,
and the journeys I've had
and continue to have.
I would have missed that, and
I don't want somebody else
to miss their life.
I deeply believe that there
are inventors out there right
now, or entrepreneurs,
or healers, or artists,
or leaders, or corporate leaders
that have brilliant ideas--
or doctors, or health
practitioners that
have something unconventional.
And on my watch, as
long as I'm alive,
I want to empower that for them
to trust what's inside them,
and to go to that next level.
Because I deeply believe they
have genius to give this world,
and I want them to give it.
>>LISA: To show it back to them.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: And to find
out themselves.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
>>LISA: And also, finding
it yourself, or myself,
if you're the coach, is
so much more impactful
than someone else saying, you
need to do this, this, this,
and five steps to this.
>>KIEVES: It doesn't work.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>KIEVES: You will not stay
with somebody else's steps.
You will only stay
with your own,
because you need to be moved.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Well, thank you so
much for showing us
what it means to thrive
through uncertainty.
And it seems like really just
to find that inner inspiration,
and that helps you
get through anything.
>>KIEVES: Yes.
Thank you so much
for the work you do.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>KIEVES: Thank you.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And if you would like to
watch any other inspirational
interviews, go to
"Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr, and I invite you
until next time to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]